New getting started guide (WIP) in experimental section of docs (#4548)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/getting-started/app-architecture.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2020 The DAML Authors. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

App Architecture
****************

In this section we'll look at the different components of our social network app.
The goal is to familiarise you enough to feel comfortable extending the code with a new feature in the next section.

There are two main components in the code - the DAML model and the React/TypeScript frontend - with generated TypeScript code to bridge the two.
Let's start by looking at the DAML model, as this sets the core logic of the application.

The DAML Model
==============

> Using VSCode (or a code editor of your choice), navigate to the ``daml`` subdirectory.

Reviewer: We want people to have a pleasant UX. Currently, this only works with VS Code. Let's not suggest to use a different editor in the main text for now. We could add a footnote but I'm not sure we need to.

> There is a single DAML file called ``User.daml`` with the model for users of the app.

Reviewer: "model for users of the app" is slightly ambiguous. We need something better but I have currently no idea what.

The core data is at the start of the ``User`` contract template.

.. literalinclude:: code/daml/User.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MAIN_TEMPLATE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- MAIN_TEMPLATE_END

There are two important aspects here:

1. The data definition (a *schema* in database terms), describing the data stored with each user contract.
In this case it is an identifier for the user and their current list of friends.
Both fields use the built-in ``Party`` type which lets us use them in the following clauses.

2. The signatories and observers of the contract.

> The signatories are the parties authorized to create new versions of the contract or archive the contract.

Reviewer: The signatories are not authorized to do something but rather need to authorize the creating of new instances of this template.

> In this case only the user has those rights.

Reviewer: It is an obligation to authorize not a right.

The observers are the parties who are able to view the contract on the ledger.
In this case all friends of a user are able to see the user contract.

Let's say what the ``signatory`` and ``observer`` clauses mean in our app more concretely.
A user Alice can see another user Bob in the network only when Alice is a friend in Bob's user contract.

> For this to be true, Bob must have previously added Alice as a friend (i.e. updated his user contract), as he is the sole signatory on his user contract.

Reviewer: I think the word "updated" gives people a wrong sense of how DAML works. I would just remove the parentheses.

If not, Bob will be invisible to Alice.

> We can see some concepts here that are central to DAML, namely *privacy* and *authorization*.

Reviewer: Given that we explained signatories before observers, we should probably write
```suggestion
We can see some concepts here that are central to DAML, namely *authorization* and *authorization*.
```

> Privacy is about who can *see* what, and authorization is about who can *do* what.

Reviewer: That's a very catchy explanation. I like it a lot!

In DAML we must answer these questions upfront, as they fundamentally change the design of an application.

The last thing we'll point out about the DAML model for now is the operation to add friends, called a *choice* in DAML.

.. literalinclude:: code/daml/User.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- ADDFRIEND_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- ADDFRIEND_END

> DAML contracts are *immutable* (can not be changed in place), so they must be updated by archiving the current instance and creating a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DAML contracts are *immutable* (can not be changed in place), so the only way to "change" them is to archive the current instance and create a new one.
```

That is what the ``AddFriend`` choice does: after checking some preconditions, it creates a new user contract with the new friend added to the list.
The ``choice`` syntax automatically includes the archival of the current instance.

.. TODO Update depending on consuming/nonconsuming choice.

Next we'll see how our DAML code is reflected and used on the UI side.

TypeScript Code Generation
==========================

> The user interface for our app is written in a variant of Javascript called TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user interface for our app is written in a superset of Javascript called TypeScript.
```

The main feature of TypeScript is a rich type system which gives us more support through type checking during development.

> Of course, we need a way to refer to our DAML model (template and choices) in our TypeScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, we need a way to refer to our DAML model (templates and choices) in our TypeScript code.
```

This is where we have a code generation tool come in to play.

The command ``daml codegen ts`` takes as argument a DAR file (a compiled form of our DAML model) and produces a number of corresponding TypeScript types and objects.
This is a crucial bridge to programming the UI around our DAML.

> The commands to run code generation (or "codegen") is::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commands to run code generation (or "codegen") are::
```

    daml build
    daml codegen ts .daml/dist/create-daml-app-0.1.0.dar -o daml-ts/src

The first command builds the ``create-daml-app-0.1.0.dar`` DAR file.
The ``codegen`` command translates the DAML into a series of TypeScript files in the ``daml-ts/src`` directory.
These definitions can then be used in the UI code, as we'll see next.

The UI
======

Our UI is written using `React <https://reactjs.org/>`_ and `TypeScript <https://www.typescriptlang.org/>`_.
React helps us write modular UI components using a functional style - a component is rerendered whenever one of its inputs changes - combined with a judicious use of global state.

We can see the latter in the way we handle ledger state throughout the application code.
For this we use a state management feature in React called `Hooks <https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html>`_.
You can see the capabilities of the DAML React hooks in ``create-daml-app/ui/src/daml-react-hooks/hooks.ts``.

> For example, we can query the ledger for all visible contracts (relative to a particular user), create contracts and exercise choices on contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we can query the ledger for all contracts that are visible to the logged-in user, create contracts and exercise choices on contracts.
```

.. TODO Update location to view DAML react hooks API

Let's see some examples of DAML React hooks.

.. literalinclude:: code/ui-before/MainView.tsx
  :start-after: -- HOOKS_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- HOOKS_END

This is the start of the component which provides data from the current state of the ledger to the main screen of our app.
The three declarations within ``MainView`` all use DAML hooks to get information from the ledger.

> For instance, ``allUsers`` uses a catch-all query to get the ``User`` contracts on the ledger.

Reviewer: We don't know about more restricted queries yet.
```suggestion
For instance, ``allUsers`` uses a query to get the ``User`` contracts on the ledger.
```
